

Table: Armor and Shields Armor Cost Armor/Shield Bonus Maximum Dex Bonus Armor Check Penalty Arcane Spell Failure Chance Speed Weight1

30 ft. 20 ft.

Light armor

Padded 5 gp +1 +8 0 5% 30 ft. 20 ft. 10 lbs.

Leather 10 gp +2 +6 0 10% 30 ft. 20 ft. 15 lbs.

Studded leather 25 gp +3 +5 –1 15% 30 ft. 20 ft. 20 lbs.

Chain shirt 100 gp +4 +4 –2 20% 30 ft. 20 ft. 25 lbs.

Medium armor

Hide 15 gp +4 +4 –3 20% 20 ft. 15 ft. 25 lbs.

Scale mail 50 gp +5 +3 –4 25% 20 ft. 15 ft. 30 lbs.

Chainmail 150 gp +6 +2 –5 30% 20 ft. 15 ft. 40 lbs.

Breastplate 200 gp +6 +3 –4 25% 20 ft. 15 ft. 30 lbs.

Heavy armor

Splint mail 200 gp +7 +0 –7 40% 20 ft.2 15 ft.2 45 lbs.

Banded mail 250 gp +7 +1 –6 35% 20 ft.2 15 ft.2 35 lbs.

Half-plate 600 gp +8 +0 –7 40% 20 ft.2 15 ft.2 50 lbs.

Full plate 1,500 gp +9 +1 –6 35% 20 ft.2 15 ft.2 50 lbs.

Shields

Buckler 15 gp +1 — –1 5% — — 5 lbs.

Shield, light wooden 3 gp +1 — –1 5% — — 5 lbs.

Shield, light steel 9 gp +1 — –1 5% — — 6 lbs.

Shield, heavy wooden 7 gp +2 — –2 15% — — 10 lbs.

Shield, heavy steel 20 gp +2 — –2 15% — — 15 lbs.

Shield, tower 30 gp +43 +2 –10 50% — — 45 lbs.

Extras

Armor spikes +50 gp — — — — — — +10 lbs.

Gauntlet, locked 8 gp — — special n/a4 — — +5 lbs.

Shield spikes +10 gp — — — — — — +5 lbs.

1 Weight figures are for armor sized to fit Medium characters. Armor fitted for Small characters weighs half as much, and armor fitted for Large characters weighs twice as much.

2 When running in heavy armor, you move only triple your speed, not quadruple.

3 A tower shield can instead grant you cover. See the description.

4 Hand not free to cast spells.

Any special benefits or accessories to the types of armor found on Table: Armor and Shields are described below.

Armor Spikes: You can have spikes added to your armor, which allow you to deal extra piercing damage (see “spiked armor” on Table: Weapons) on a successful grapple attack. The spikes count as a martial weapon. If you are not proficient with them, you take a –4 penalty on grapple checks when you try to use them. You can also make a regular melee attack (or off-hand attack) with the spikes, and they count as a light weapon in this case. (You can't also make an attack with armor spikes if you have already made an attack with another off-hand weapon, and vice versa.) An enhancement bonus to a suit of armor does not improve the spikes' effectiveness, but the spikes can be made into magic weapons in their own right.

Banded Mail: Banded mail is made up of overlapping strips of metal, fastened to a leather backing. The suit includes gauntlets.

Breastplate: Covering only the torso, a breastplate is made up of a single piece of sculpted metal.

Buckler: This small metal shield is worn strapped to your forearm. You can use a bow or crossbow without penalty while carrying it. You can also use your shield arm to wield a weapon (whether you are using an off-hand weapon or using your off hand to help wield a two-handed weapon), but you take a –1 penalty on attack rolls while doing so. This penalty stacks with those that may apply for fighting with your off hand and for fighting with two weapons. In any case, if you use a weapon in your off hand, you lose the buckler's AC bonus until your next turn. You can cast a spell with somatic components using your shield arm, but you lose the buckler's AC bonus until your next turn. You can't make a shield bash with a buckler.

Chain Shirt: Covering the torso, this shirt is made up of thousands of interlocking metal rings.

Chainmail: Unlike a chain shirt, chainmail covers the legs and arms of the wearer. The suit includes gauntlets.

Full Plate: This metal suit includes gauntlets, heavy leather boots, a visored helmet, and a thick layer of padding that is worn underneath the armor. Each suit of full plate must be individually fitted to its owner by a master armorsmith, although a captured suit can be resized to fit a new owner at a cost of 200 to 800 (2d4 × 100) gold pieces.

Gauntlet, Locked: This armored gauntlet has small chains and braces that allow the wearer to attach a weapon to the gauntlet so that it cannot be dropped easily. It provides a +10 bonus to your Combat Maneuver Defense to keep from being disarmed in combat. Removing a weapon from a locked gauntlet or attaching a weapon to a locked gauntlet is a full-round action that provokes attacks of opportunity.

The price given is for a single locked gauntlet. The weight given applies only if you're wearing a breastplate, light armor, or no armor. Otherwise, the locked gauntlet replaces a gauntlet you already have as part of the armor.

While the gauntlet is locked, you can't use the hand wearing it for casting spells or employing skills. (You can still cast spells with somatic components, provided that your other hand is free.)

Like a normal gauntlet, a locked gauntlet lets you deal lethal damage rather than nonlethal damage with an unarmed strike.

Half-Plate: Combining elements of full plate and chainmail, half-plate includes gauntlets and a helm.

Hide: Hide armor is made up of the tanned and preserved skin of any thick-hided beast.

Leather: Leather armor is made up of pieces of hard boiled leather carefully sewn together.

Padded: Little more than heavy, quilted cloth, this armor provides only the most basic protection.

Scale Mail: Scale mail is made up of dozens of small overlapping metal plates. The suit includes gauntlets.

Shield, Heavy; Wooden or Steel: You strap a shield to your forearm and grip it with your hand. A heavy shield is so heavy that you can't use your shield hand for anything else.

Wooden or Steel: Wooden and steel shields offer the same basic protection, though they respond differently to spells and effects.

Shield Bash Attacks: You can bash an opponent with a heavy shield, using it as an off-hand weapon. See “shield, heavy” on Table: Weapons for the damage dealt by a shield bash. Used this way, a heavy shield is a martial bludgeoning weapon. For the purpose of penalties on attack rolls, treat a heavy shield as a one-handed weapon. If you use your shield as a weapon, you lose its AC bonus until your next turn. An enhancement bonus on a shield does not improve the effectiveness of a shield bash made with it, but the shield can be made into a magic weapon in its own right.

Shield, Light; Wooden or Steel: You strap a shield to your forearm and grip it with your hand. A light shield's weight lets you carry other items in that hand, although you cannot use weapons with it.

Wooden or Steel: Wooden and steel shields offer the same basic protection, though they respond differently to some spells and effects.

Shield Bash Attacks: You can bash an opponent with a light shield, using it as an off-hand weapon. See “shield, light” on Table: Weapons for the damage dealt by a shield bash. Used this way, a light shield is a martial bludgeoning weapon. For the purpose of penalties on attack rolls, treat a light shield as a light weapon. If you use your shield as a weapon, you lose its AC bonus until your next turn. An enhancement bonus on a shield does not improve the effectiveness of a shield bash made with it, but the shield can be made into a magic weapon in its own right.

Shield, Tower: This massive wooden shield is nearly as tall as you are. In most situations, it provides the indicated shield bonus to your AC. As a standard action, however, you can use a tower shield to grant you total cover until the beginning of your next turn. When using a tower shield in this way, you must choose one edge of your space. That edge is treated as a solid wall for attacks targeting you only. You gain total cover for attacks that pass through this edge and no cover for attacks that do not pass through this edge (see Combat). The shield does not, however, provide cover against targeted spells; a spellcaster can cast a spell on you by targeting the shield you are holding. You cannot bash with a tower shield, nor can you use your shield hand for anything else.

When employing a tower shield in combat, you take a –2 penalty on attack rolls because of the shield's encumbrance.

Shield Spikes: These spikes turn a shield into a martial piercing weapon and increase the damage dealt by a shield bash as if the shield were designed for a creature one size category larger than you (see “spiked shields” on Table: Weapons). You can't put spikes on a buckler or a tower shield. Otherwise, attacking with a spiked shield is like making a shield bash attack.

An enhancement bonus on a spiked shield does not improve the effectiveness of a shield bash made with it, but a spiked shield can be made into a magic weapon in its own right.

Splint Mail: Splint mail is made up of metal strips, like banded mail. The suit includes gauntlets.

Studded Leather: Similar to leather armor, this suit is reinforced with small metal studs.


